Add release notes for 0.239 (#14908)
prestodb/presto: presto-docs/src/main/sphinx/release/release-0.239.rst

=============
Release 0.239
=============

General Changes
_______________
* Fix  :func:`classification_miss_rate` and :func:`classification_fall_out` functions (:pr:`14740`).
* Fix NPE in `/v1/thread` end point.
* Fix an issue where the property ``ignore_stats_calculator_failures`` would not be honored for certain queries that had filters pushed down to the table scan.
* Fix missing query completion events for queries which fail prior to dispatching.
* Fix potential infinite loop when the setting ``use_legacy_scheduler`` is set to false.
* Add aggregation function SET_UNION.
* Add local disk spilling support for `ORDER BY` syntax.
* Add local disk spilling support for aggregation functions with `ORDER BY` or `DISTINCT` syntax.
* Add optimization for cursor projection & filter by extract and compute common subexpressions among all projections & filter first. This optimization can be turned off by session property ``optimize_common_sub_expressions``.
* Add support for 2 security modes for views. The default `DEFINER` security mode is the same as the previous behavior. Tables referenced in the view are accessed using the permissions of the view owner (the **creator** or.

> * Add support for warning on unfiltered partition keys using `partition-keys-to-warn-on-no-filtering` system property.

Reviewer: I updated the description with the release note for this PR for https://github.com/prestodb/presto/pull/14800 but I can't seem to open a PR against your repo to update it here.

* Add support to optimize min/max only metadata query. This is controlled by existing config ``optimizer.optimize-metadata-queries`` and session property ``optimize_metadata_queries``. Note that enabling this config/session property might change query result if there are metadata that refers to empty data, e.g. empty hive partition.
* Remove experimental feature to perform grouped execution for eligible table scans and its associated configuration property ``experimental.grouped-execution-for-elligible-table-scans`` and session property ``grouped_execution_for_eligible_table_scans``.

> * Definer** of the view) rather than the user executing the query. In the `INVOKER` security mode, tables referenced in the view are accessed using the permissions of the query user (the **invoker** of the view).

Reviewer 2: this should be part of the note `Add support for 2 security modes for views`.  Looks like somehow some other bullets came in between.

* Enable ``dynamic-schedule-for-grouped-execution`` by default.  In future releases, we will remove this property, and grouped execution will always use dynamic scheduling.

> * Enable ``grouped-execution-for-aggregation`` and ``experimental.grouped-execution-for-eligible-table-scans`` by default.

Reviewer 2: sorry for the confusion.  The commit for `Remove experimental feature to perform grouped execution for eligible table scans ...` was merged after this one, so this note should just say 
```
Enable ``grouped-execution-for-aggregation`` by default.
```

> * Enable async page transport with non-blocking IO by default. This can be disabled by setting ``exchange.async-page-transport-enabled`` configuration property to false.

Reviewer 2: can we get more information about what this means?

> * Introduce new configuration property ``grouped-execution-enabled`` and session property ``grouped_execution`` to turn grouped execution on or off.  This property is true by default.  If set to false, it is equivalent to setting all of ``grouped-execution-for-aggregation``, ``grouped-execution-for-join``, and ``experimental.grouped-execution-for-eligible-table-scans`` to false.  In future releases we will remove these other properties and only have a single switch for enabling and disabling grouped execution.

Reviewer 2: remove `experimental.grouped-execution-for-eligilbe-table-scans` from this list, as we decided to get rid of this feature entirely instead.

> * Introduce new configuration property ``grouped-execution-enabled`` and session property ``grouped_execution`` to turn grouped execution on or off.  This property is true by default.  If set to false, it is equivalent to setting all of ``grouped-execution-for-aggregation``, ``grouped-execution-for-join``, and ``experimental.grouped-execution-for-eligible-table-scans`` to false.  In future releases we will remove these other properties and only have a single switch for enabling and disabling grouped execution.

Reviewer 2: also, can this be moved above the previous note so that all the grouped execution property changes are next to each other.

> * Reverting Reliable Resource Group Versioning.

Reviewer 2: needs more information and to be in proper release note format.

> * Specify allowed roles for HTTP endpoints.

Reviewer 2: needs to be fleshed out

> * The worker page's thread snapshot UI does not work (no stack trace displayed on click) when there is active query load (tested under Chrome). This patch fixes an uninitialized variable in client JS that was causing this UI behavior.

Reviewer 2: Something like
`Fix a bug where the UI for the worker's thread snapshot wouldn't display the stack trace.`

Also, should be in a separate Web UI section.

* Update JTS to 1.17.0. This changes the implementation of ST_Buffer: the output might change by a small (1e-10) amount.

SPI Changes
___________
* Move `DistinctLimitNode` to `presto-spi` module for connectors to push down.

Elasticsearch Changes
_____________________
* Add configurations to improve concurrency in Elasticsearch.
* Support Elasticsearch numeric keyword.
* Support composite publish_address in Elasticsearch.

Hive Changes
____________

> * Add support for caching the Glue metastore.

Reviewer 2: We should add a release note for encryption at rest @mayankgarg1990 

* Add support for reading and writing DWRF files with encryption.  To create a table with encrypted columns....

=============
Release 0.239
=============

**Highlights**
==============
* Add support for ``DEFINER`` and ``INVOKER`` view security models.
* Add support for caching Glue metastore in Hive connector.
* Add Pinot SQL endpoint support.

General Changes
_______________
* Fix :func:`classification_miss_rate` and :func:`classification_fall_out` (:pr:`14740`).
* Fix ``NullPointerException`` in ``/v1/thread`` end point.
* Fix an issue where the property ``ignore_stats_calculator_failures`` would not be honored
  for certain queries that had filters pushed down to the table scan.
* Fix missing query completion events for queries which fail prior to dispatching.
* Fix potential infinite loop when the setting ``use_legacy_scheduler`` is set to ``false``.

> * Optimize cursor projection and filter by extracting and computing common subexpressions

Reviewer 2: This description is a bit too technical. If this is accurate, maybe say
```
Optimize queries with repeated expressions in filters or projections by computing the common expressions only once.  This can be disabled by the session property
  ``optimize_common_sub_expressions``.
```

  among all projections and filter first. This can be disabled by the session property
  ``optimize_common_sub_expressions``.
* Add aggregation function :func:`set_union`.
* Add local disk spilling support for queries with ``ORDER BY`` or ``DISTINCT``.

> * Add support to optimize min/max only metadata query. This is controlled by configuration

Reviewer 2: what's a min/max only metadata query?

Reviewer 3: Queries that are doing min(), max() only kind of operations

Reviewer 3: I have reworded this to be more clear (hopefully)

  property ``optimizer.optimize-metadata-queries`` and session property ``optimize_metadata_queries``.
  Note: Enabling this optimization might change query result if there are metadata that refers to
  empty data, see :pr:`14845` for examples.

> * Add new unified grouped execution configuration property ``grouped-execution-enabled`` and

Reviewer 2: Can you also mention here that ``grouped-execution-for-aggregation-enabled`` and ``grouped-execution-for-join-enabled`` will be removed in a future release.

Reviewer 3: mentioned `grouped-execution-for-aggregation-enabled` next to the point below where I say that it is enabled by default. Added the point about join one here

  session property ``grouped_execution`` with default set to ``true`` (:pr:`14886`).
* Remove experimental feature to perform grouped execution for eligible table scans and its
  associated configuration property ``experimental.grouped-execution-for-eligible-table-scans``
  and session property ``grouped_execution_for_eligible_table_scans``.
* Enable ``dynamic-schedule-for-grouped-execution`` by default.  This property will be removed
  in a future release.

> * Enable ``grouped-execution-for-aggregation`` by default.

Reviewer 2: just realized the property is called ``grouped-execution-for-aggregation-enabled``.

* Enable async page transport with non-blocking IO for exchange by default. This can be disabled by
  setting the configuration property ``exchange.async-page-transport-enabled`` to ``false``.

Security Changes
----------------
* Add support for ``DEFINER`` and ``INVOKER`` view security modes. While querying a view the former
  uses the permissions of the view owner and the latter uses the query runner's permissions.
  See :doc:`/sql/create-view`.

JDBC Changes
____________
* Implemented ``DatabaseMetaData#getClientInfoProperties`` API.

Web UI Changes
--------------
*  Fix a bug where the UI for the worker's thread snapshot wouldn't display the stack trace.

Hive Changes
____________
* Add support for caching the Glue metastore.
* Add support for warning on unfiltered partition keys. This can be enabled using the configuration
  property ``partition-keys-to-warn-on-no-filtering``.

Elasticsearch Changes
_____________________

> * Add configurations to improve concurrency.

Reviewer 2: what are the configurations?

Reviewer 4: `elasticsearch.max-http-connections` : Maximum number of persistent HTTP connections to Elasticsearch.
``elasticsearch.http-thread-count`` : Number of threads handling HTTP connections to Elasticsearch

Reviewer 3: added the detailed configuration information

* Add support for numeric keyword.

> * Add support for composite publish_address.

Reviewer 2: what's a composite publish_address? (maybe this is just because I don't know elasticsearch)

Reviewer 4: publish_address field can contain addresses of the following form:

    cname/ip:port
    ip:port

If the CNAME is present, elasticsearch connector will use the CNAME and port.
Otherwise, it will use the IP and port.

Reviewer 3: Updated `publish_address` to be back quoted and also linked to the PR for context

=============
Release 0.239
=============

**Highlights**
==============
* Add support for ``DEFINER`` and ``INVOKER`` view security models.
* Add support for caching Glue metastore in Hive connector.
* Add Pinot SQL endpoint support.

General Changes
_______________

> * Fix :func:`classification_miss_rate` and :func:`classification_fall_out` (:pr:`14740`).

Reviewer 5: * Fix incorrect results from :func:`classification_miss_rate`, :func:`classification_fall_out`, and :func:`classification_precision` (:pr:`14740`).

> * Fix ``NullPointerException`` in ``/v1/thread`` end point.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Fix error in ``/v1/thread`` end point.
```

* Fix an issue where the property ``ignore_stats_calculator_failures`` would not be honored

>   for certain queries that had filters pushed down to the table scan.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
  for certain queries.
```

> * Fix missing query completion events for queries which fail prior to dispatching.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Fix missing query completion events for queries which fail prior to execution.
```

> * Fix potential infinite loop when the setting ``use_legacy_scheduler`` is set to ``false``.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
* Fix potential performance regression when setting ``use_legacy_scheduler`` is set to ``false``.
```

  ``grouped-execution-for-join-enabled`` will be removed in a future release (:pr:`14886`).
* Remove experimental feature to perform grouped execution for eligible table scans and its
  associated configuration property ``experimental.grouped-execution-for-eligible-table-scans``
  and session property ``grouped_execution_for_eligible_table_scans``.
* Enable ``dynamic-schedule-for-grouped-execution`` by default.  This property will be removed
  in a future release.
* Enable ``grouped-execution-for-aggregation-enabled`` by default. This property will be removed in
  a future release.
* Enable async page transport with non-blocking IO for exchange by default. This can be disabled by
  setting the configuration property ``exchange.async-page-transport-enabled`` to ``false``.

Security Changes
----------------
* Add support for ``DEFINER`` and ``INVOKER`` view security modes. While querying a view the former
  uses the permissions of the view owner and the latter uses the query runner's permissions.
  See :doc:`/sql/create-view`.

JDBC Changes
____________
* Implemented ``DatabaseMetaData#getClientInfoProperties`` API.

Web UI Changes
--------------

> *  Fix a bug where the UI for the worker's thread snapshot wouldn't display the stack trace.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
*  Fix worker thread snapshot UI to correctly display the stack trace.
```

Hive Changes
____________
* Add support for caching the Glue metastore.
* Add support for warning on unfiltered partition keys. This can be enabled using the configuration

>   property ``partition-keys-to-warn-on-no-filtering``.

Reviewer 6: What is the default setting?

Reviewer 3: Generally when we say enable using, my assumption is that it is disabled by default.

=============
Release 0.239
=============

**Highlights**
==============
* Add support for ``DEFINER`` and ``INVOKER`` view security models.
* Add support for caching Glue metastore in Hive connector.
* Add Pinot SQL endpoint support.

> General Changes

Author: We may be to add a heading (e.g. `**Details**` or `**Notes**`) in parallel with `**Highlights**` so that it doesn't looks like the sections below are sub-sections of the highlights. We're also missing this with 0.238 release notes, so I'm ok with fixing this later.

=============
Release 0.239
=============

**Highlights**
==============
* Add support for ``DEFINER`` and ``INVOKER`` view security models.
* Add support for caching Glue metastore in Hive connector.
* Add Pinot SQL endpoint support.

**Details**
==============

General Changes
_______________
* Fix incorrect results from :func:`classification_miss_rate`, :func:`classification_fall_out`

>   and :func:`classification_precision` (:pr:14740).

Author: I think you need
```
:pr:`14740`
```
Could you visually check the content of the html by running.
```
cd presto-docs
make clean
make html
```
